Well, good morning and welcome, ministers and officials.
Thank you for coming this morning to the Social Services and Community Select
Committee. So if you wanted to do an introduction
and give us some comments initially, and then from there we'll move to questions.
Great. Good morning, everyone. Nice to be with you again.
Today
I'm joined by some familiar faces.
Debbie Power, who's the chief executive of MSD, and her leadership
team. Simon MacPherson is the deputy chief executive of
policy. Liv Rickard, deputy chief executive service
delivery.
I'll get them to wave so I don't keep turning around.
Melissa Gill, who is deputy chief executive, organizational assurance and
communication. Nadine Kilmister, who is people and
capability. Marama Edwards is deputy chief executive.
Sasha O'Dea is DCE strategy and insights.
Talaya Andrews is acting DCE Maori communities and
partnerships. Tracy Voice, DCE for
transformation, and Hannah Kerr is the director for
child wellbeing and poverty reduction.
I'm going to hold my comments for now and pass to Minister Simmons
for her opening comments and her questions.
She is restricted in terms of time, so once she's concluded her
15 minutes of questions, she'll go, and then I'll come back to my comments.
Brilliant. Thank you.
Thank you. And thank you very much
excuse me, for the opportunity to be here with the committee today.
Obviously, my priority in this role is to support the minister
by taking some responsibility for some specific initiatives
within the portfolio. And I'd like to talk about those three key
areas of work, the Carer Strategy Action Plan, the
youth service, and also training incentive allowance.
So I'll just go through very quickly some comments and then open for questions
on that. There are at least half a million carers and
we probably all know some of them. Potentially as many as one
million carers that are the informal or unpaid
carers in New Zealand.
They make an enormous contribution to our communities.
It was estimated back in 2022, as
much as $17.6 billion of care
that they were providing, and particularly around things like dementia
care, where that alone is estimated to be
around $2.8 billion worth of care.
And we know that our population's aging, and as our population
ages, care needs increase. So it's critical that we support
our carers to be able to continue in their roles, and that
requires
new and more coordinated cross-government
approach to that. And so I've worked with my colleagues on a new Carer
Strategy Action Plan, which was supported by Cabinet
fact in November. We had consultation from November
last year through to March this year.
And unlike previous plans, the action plan's going to be
ongoing, so it's focused on achieving shared outcomes
across government.
Feedback from the consultation was largely positive, particularly
around focusing on achieving some long-term
outcomes, and they were very supportive about it
being a flexible approach,
and an emphasis on the whole of government effort.
So the three priority areas that have come out of that consultation,
health and wellbeing, financial security, and
recognition and appreciation of the work and the contribution that they
are making. So, I really want to acknowledge the Carer
Alliance, who have been a fantastic support
in particularly that consultation work.
They organized quite a lot of the consultation
across
different sectors, and I acknowledge the tremendous amount of effort and
work they put into it, and I expect to launch the final action
plan later this year. In the Youth
Service NEAT, Youth Service supports young people
to engage in and remain in education, training or
work-based learning, and to progress on to employment.
Youth Service NEAT continues to play a really critical
role in supporting those young people with wraparound
support,
particularly those most at risk of going onto the job seeker support at
age 18.
It focuses on that support that
enables young people to re-engage or stay
engaged with education or training or work-based learning.
As at 31 March 2026, so
2,129
young people enrolled in Youth Service NEAT.
And there's been, as you might expect at this stage in our economic cycle,
a steady increase in enrollments.
MSD expect the number to be similar over this next '26,
'27 period. And finally, Training Incentive Allowance, which
is an area I'm particularly interested in because it intersects with my other
portfolio of tertiary education.
There has been an increase in the number of clients who have received
Training Incentive Allowance. There's been a 14% increase over the
last year. The majority of those have been on a benefit for
over two years. Most TIA grants go to those that are
on solo parent support,
and
they go into tertiary education that is going to enable them to have
a pathway to employment. So on that, happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you, Minister. First question, Willie Jean.
Oh, mine are for Louise.
Oh, is that right? Oh.
Mine are for-
Thank you. I've got a question. No, you're okay. Sure. Got more. Penny.
Thank you. Minister, I'm particularly interested in
the increasing numbers of NEATs across the country with
finding that particularly in the rural areas.
Mm-hmm.
Could you please give us an indication of what kind of
support's available
to these young people-
Mm
... to get them engaged?
Yes. Look, there's a range of supports, not only within
MSD, the youth services, but also across the tertiary
sector. So it's really important that we do have that range
of
support for them and the Youth Service NEAT,
the-- And I've gone out and visited a number of these NEAT services.
They really are providing tremendous wraparound support
because many of them come with quite significant learning issues,
difficult family environments, and they really need that wraparound support.
And then you see the
other options within, for example, tertiary, where there's youth
guarantees,
and that enables young people to upskill with their foundation
numeracy literacy skills, and also go into pre-employment programs
that then hopefully take them through into, for example, apprenticeships.
So I think it's really important that, and it's why we work
together as labor market ministers, that we see a range
of supports, not only MSD, but across tertiary, and
also within the compulsory schooling sector, where the work that we're
doing around the vocational pathways to ensure a
seamless progression from secondary into tertiary
to prevent that falling through the cracks.
Supplementary, Willie Jean.
Yeah, I have a sup-
Oh, you see it. Oh, I'll go with your supplement first.
Oh, okay.
So the wraparound services sound really great.
But can you give us an assurance that the workforce on the
ground has the capability and
you've actually got the numbers to support these young people?
Mm. So, the services within MSD, the Youth
Unemployment
and NEAT Service is contracted out, and so they
are community-based organizations that provide that service.
And that's really important because they're in the community.
They get to know these young people.
They provide the coaches for the young people, and they also have the
links with the employers so that they can start that
engagement into employment. So,
it is really important to have those community-based
organizations having the contracts to enable their support
of the NEATs because there's no doubt that those in the community
know best how to negotiate and integrate those young
people into the community.
Supplementary, Willie Jean.
Sorry, did you want to-
No, no, no
Hi, Kia Ora, Minister.
Given that the recent changes the government made to 18 and
19 year olds not being eligible for job seeker benefits,
what additional funding and initiatives have you got in this
budget for that growing number of young
people who are not in education, training or employment and have no
option for financial support through the benefit?
Absolutely, and if I can talk about some of the things outside of
social development and employment portfolio, there's 87 million to pick up
1,000 more youth guarantee places.
There's an additional 69 million to double the number of
trades academy places. So again, it's an example
of the labor market ministers working together to ensure it's
not just in one place that these young NEATS are supported, but across the
board. And I particularly acknowledge the far north, where
the NEAT numbers are highest.
Thirty-four million has been allocated to NorthTec
to support NorthTec to
create a fit for purpose
building and facility that our young people will be proud to go into.
It will provide a simulated nursing suite
because we know of the health needs up there and the need to have
good training for our
young people who are going into the health areas.
So it is across the range. It is certainly
the youth services through MSD, but it is across a
whole of government approach.
So, one of the things that I've spoken about is how difficult it
is for young people to find employment.
Mm.
I use the example that was reported on RNZ recently, where there were only
15 jobs advertised for Kaikohe.
Recently in Auckland, I saw that there were
1,225 applicants applying for just
one cleaner role in Auckland. I'm hearing from youth
providers that Rangatahi are wanting work, they just cannot get
work. How are they supposed to find employment when there are
1,225 applicants for a single cleaning job?
Absolutely acknowledge that in times of high
unemployment, youth are those most impacted,
and that is a symptom of an economy that we
inherited that was going downhill,
inherited a number of young people, and it's an extremely sad
situation to have a cohort of young people-
And then you cut the supports
... who did not have the numeracy and literacy
skills embedded for them when they were in the compulsory
schooling sector. And so we absolutely now are having to
do catch-up work for those young people who did not get
those foundation skills in the compulsory schooling sector where they should
have got them, and the decline in numeracy and literacy should be
an absolute-
The jobs aren't there, though
... They have to have those skills as well, and that is what Youth
Guarantees does. It helps them get those numeracy and literacy
skills, which are basic skills for whatever job they are going
for. So it's incredibly important that we do that work with
our young people so they have a pathway to employment, because they
must have those basic level foundation skills.
And then they're one of 1,225 applicants.
One last question here from Dana.
Thank you, Minister. I just am interested in the training incentive allowance and
what that actually delivers for people, what impact it will
have on the community. Because we know
there are ways and means, but if
people aren't able to get the job seeker benefit, and there are other ways that
they can actually get some help. What that looks like.
Look, the training incentive allowance is one that I've been involved with for
probably over the last 25 years, and it's something that
I've seen make an absolute transformational change
for particularly women,
and particularly women who have had children, are on a
sole parent support, and it gives them the
opportunity to then look at developing their
career. And so I think it's an incredibly important
thing that governments do and have done over the last
25, perhaps 30 years to give those young women in
particular, it's not
only young women, but it is predominantly, to give them a chance
when perhaps something has occurred in their life that they
didn't manage to get trained at all.
And so, I saw it a lot in my previous role
of a lot of women would go into
pre-entry to nursing, then they'd either go into enrolled
nursing or registered
nursing bachelor's degree, and it
gives them a foot up. It gives them an opportunity.
Their fees are paid for, assistance with
their childcare. And so it opens the door and it gives
them a horizon that they may not have seen for themselves.
Thank you very much, Minister Simmonds. Thank you for your time this morning.
Thank you. My apologies, but I'm having to dash off.
That's all right. Welcome again, Minister.
So if you want to give us an overview of your portfolio.
I shall.
Thank you.
So, obviously getting people into work and independence is a big
focus of ours because it's essential for better social and economic
outcomes. And it's also really importantly central
to reducing material hardship for children.
And we know that work breaks intergenerational dependence by reducing the
number of children in benefit dependent households and young people moving
onto benefit. At the same time, we've got to ensure that
those who genuinely do need support can draw
on the state support when they need it.
The welfare system must also be fair to taxpayers by funding services
that we know are proven to work, and reduce the longer-term
costs
On the 29th of May, we passed legislation to keep the welfare system
aligned with modern expectations while supporting those who need it.
The Social Security Modernisation Amendment Act is about making sure the
welfare system delivers support to New Zealanders efficiently,
consistently, and sustainably, without an
undue drain on stretched resources.
A key feature of the act is enabling the appropriate use of automated
decision making for simple rules based processes.
To be clear, it is not generative AI, and it
will not replace human judgment where discretion is
required. And of course, there are many instances across MSD
work where discretion is required.
But it will also ensure that time is freed up so that case
managers can interact with
clients more directly.
I want to reiterate that this isn't new for MSD.
If you think about the important work that MSD did with wage subsidies,
they used automated decision making.
So they've been using it for a number of years and really enabled them to
deliver greater service to the public at times that they needed it,
and also through the child support pass on.
Budget '26 advances welfare reform by supporting those in genuine
need and, really importantly, incentivizing work.
We are investing NZ$93.3 million over two years to
help sole parents find work and to reduce their time
on welfare. Sole parents we know spend on average
17 and a half years on benefit.
So 25,000 sole parents will benefit from
case management.
We're also investing NZ$38 million over four years so New
Zealanders experiencing hardship can access food support.
This includes,
for the very first time, baseline funding for food
distribution infrastructure, which supports about 4.5
million meals a month, and also baselined
funding for the KickStart Breakfast program, which we
know reaches about 46,000 children.
We will also, in this budget, continue community food support and food
security initiatives for another year.
As Minister for Child Poverty Reduction, I lead the response to Dame Karen
Patasi's review of the children's system.
And in September last year, we accepted every one of the
14 recommendations with a focus on child
safety.
Three are already complete and work on the rest is underway.
Budget '26 allocates NZ$90 million over four years to
strengthen safety nets,
to prevent harm in the children's system.
These include the rollout of mandatory training for
20,000 children's workers over the next two years,
ensuring there's capacity to respond safely and effectively to
more reports of concern,
and to support Health New Zealand to increase participation in the Child
Protection Protocol.
We are taking a phased approach. It's really important that the government
understands the system impacts to inform
future decisions about resources.
Budget '26 builds on previous budgets to deliver a welfare system that
supports work, and at the same time, sets clear rights and
responsibilities. We are getting people off benefit into work
despite challenging economic conditions by investing in the programs
that we know are proven to work. And we've got high aspirations for
young Kiwis, and we are particularly focused on
decreasing benefit dependency in young
people. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Minister. First question, Louise Upston.
Thank you, Minister.
Can you confirm that the budget economic fiscal update
2026 shows that the job seeker numbers will be above
200,000 in 2030?
Yes. As the member will know, that there are a range of
forecasts.
One of the things that
I think is really good to see at the moment is that
we aren't seeing the numbers hit the
forecasts that were put in place. We're
also seeing, if you look at the unemployment rate, was forecast to be
5.5%. We're sitting at 5.3.
And actually, the numbers of those on the job seeker benefit,
touch wood, hit their peak in December last
year. So despite the war in the Middle East
having a direct impact on our economy, we haven't
seen that translate significantly to job seeker numbers.
So I'm really confident, despite the BEFU
forecasts, that we're heading in the right direction and that
our numbers are tracking down. Did we set an ambitious
job seeker target to reduce the number of people on job seeker benefit
by 50,000? Absolutely. And I do not shy away from that for one
moment, because I know the enormous difference every
single person that leaves the benefit for work, the
enormous impact it has on them, their families, and their communities.
So, Minister, has there been a single BEFU or HIFU that
has actually revised the job seeker numbers down for
2030?
Well, as I've said, the forecasts,
we are under the forecast numbers at the moment, but there is-
It hasn't been, right?
Well-
It's still projecting-
No. What I'm saying is they are forecasts,
and we are currently under what the forecast rates would be,
both in terms of an unemployment rate and the job seeker numbers.
So forecasts are forecasts. They are not Um,
exact predictions of what will happen.
Uh, and I see my job in leading the team at MSD is to
maintain a very singular focus on reducing the number of
people who are reliant on welfare, and in particular, reducing
the number of people on the job seeker benefit.
So assuming that the numbers will be above
200,000, that'll be 10,000 more than you
inherited, and 60,000 more than
your target. Have you received any official
advice, verbally or in writing, that your target is
unachievable?
Well,
would be probably not a month that goes by that I'm not told how
ambitious my target is. But I'm not shying away from the target.
And what I would just say is looking at some of the
figures, if we want to talk about increases over
time,
the six years that Labor was in, we saw a
54% increase in the number of people on job seeker support.
In the three years that we have been in, it has been a 14%
increase. So I'll put my record up against that any day.
Is it an ambitious target? Absolutely.
But as I said before, I'm not shying away from it.
We are putting in place a far more active welfare system, and
that's why we're continuing to see really strong numbers of
people leaving welfare for work.
And how many have come back on?
In the year to March this year, we've seen a 7%
increase in the year prior. And that's
despite the headwinds that we have continued to face,
with tariffs last year, with the war in the Middle East this year.
7% increase on exits into work, which I
think is a really great result.
And after excluding 18 and 19 year
olds
from the job seeker benefit, are there any other groups that you are
considering arbitrarily excluding to reach your target?
Well, let's be clear about the intent of the policy that we announced
in Budget '25 around 18 and 19 year olds.
We want to see every 18 and 19-year-old in this country
in employment, education, or training.
1,225 applicants for one job. Wow.
And my colleague talked about
some of the initiatives in Budget '26 that will assist
that.
But we don't want young people on welfare.
But what I will say is there are a large number of programs that
are available to assist 18 and 19 year olds.
So yes, we are saying they will be the responsibility of their
parents while they are 18 or 19.
But whether it's mayor's task force for jobs, whether it's He Pou
Tangata,
whether it is a wide range of initiatives and programs,
both in communities and offered by MSD, they will continue to be
available for 18 and 19 year olds because we don't want
them to get stuck on welfare. We want them to start life
in a really strong position.
And bluntly, I don't see that another 20 years on welfare should be as
good as it gets for young people. And I'd be surprised if that member didn't agree
with me on that.
Supplementary, Maureen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, you've mentioned
instability in your response.
I just wonder if
you do any scenario planning. I know it sounds like crystal ball
gazing, but any scenario planning for other
future events and how you might respond to that?
Yeah. So I think if you look at the
HIifu compared to the BIifu, the numbers change.
That's based on what we saw with the conflict in the Middle East.
Treasury's forecasts, they are a bit like crystal ball
gazing. But they are based on what we expect will
happen,
with as much data as possible. And I think what is really
clear is MSD as an organization
looks at what programs have been effective and what types of crisis in the
past.
We have really significant measurements around what programs are
effective. So 65% of the employment
programs are rated. Sasha, correct
me if I'm wrong, I think 93% are
deemed to be effective. So she's going to check that I've got that number
right. So we have a high degree of
confidence that
if there's a challenge that comes up that has an
impact on business confidence, which clearly then has an
impact on businesses' confidence to employ,
which affects the employment rate and therefore the job seeker numbers,
we know what interventions work best.
And, if I could refer members to a
TBNZ
news story two nights ago that talked about Ara,
which is an initiative in South Auckland, which is all about
preparing young people
for employment in construction and in tourism and
hospitality, and it's all about ensuring that our
young people are ready to go as those jobs
arrive. And if we look at different parts of the country, in Canterbury and
Southland, they are absolutely there.
So we know that different parts of the country are growing
and recovering faster.
So,
we know those opportunities are coming.
I want to ensure that as many young people as possible are ready to
claim those opportunities.
There's a supplementary to that, Minister.
You sort of segued actually into what I was thinking about as you were talking,
which is that just interested in what the Ministry of Social Development is doing
and thinking about
Deploying people in different parts of the country.
In Southland, talking to leaders in my community, doesn't know what
a recession is.
And in fact, the biggest issues on the horizon are not enough people, not enough
housing to accommodate those people who are needed for the work and projects that
are underway and projected to happen.
Is there some thinking happening there?
Yes, absolutely. So that's both as my role, as
Minister for Social Development and Employment, but also the lead minister for the
Labor Market Ministers group.
So if we take a small example, with the Regional
Infrastructure Fund, that is government funding, that is going into
regions. We want to ensure that the jobs that get created,
as many as possible of those are going to
job seekers. So there is quite intensive work with the
teams from the Ministry of
MB, the regional development teams, and the Ministry of Social
Development to ensure that we are lining that up.
If you take that on a bigger scale,
we're also, Ngā Puna Pukenga is an
initiative, it started with Auckland Council, is now being rolled out to
Wellington and Dunedin. So where there are significant council
spend on infrastructure initiatives, they are partnering
with MSD,
not just the lead contractor, but the subcontractors as well to
ensure that it is job seekers that are taking those opportunities.
But we've gone further than that, and we're looking at the forward
pipeline to say,
and it's working on big initiatives, but it's also working in a smaller
scale with individual employers to say, "What
are your employment needs in the next three, six, 12 months?" So
MSD have changed their focus to work with large employers to then
say to this particular business, talk about Tegal or
whoever else,
"What are your needs in the next three to six, 12 months?
What does that mean in terms of the people we have on our books?"
Some of them might require some training to get ready for those
openings.
But it is working incredibly well, those really detailed
partnerships and the planning. So we're not just
reacting to a vacancy now, we're able to plan ahead
and make sure our people are ready.
And I'm confident that's the significant shift in the way we're working
is what is reducing, sorry, or increasing the number of
exits into work, and we have to look at that regionally.
Southland is very different from Northland, for example.
And the regional commissioners for MSD
are really leading their teams to build strong
relationships with not just large employers, but also
chambers of commerce now to really grow the opportunities and
better match
job seekers to opportunities.
Last supplementary, Louise Upston.
Thank you. Minister, I put it to the previous minister, the
situation where I have seen 1,225
applicants for one cleaning job in Auckland when
we have job seeker numbers that are soaring.
The minister basically blamed the economy that this government
inherited. When will you take responsibility for your
government's poor choices?
Yeah. So clearly, economic conditions aren't
created in a week. They are created-
Three years
... over, they are created over time. Absolutely.
And we can spend some time traversing how we got to where we are, but I
won't do that.
And I will say for people who are seeking
employment, it's incredibly challenging when they are competing
in a market with others. But that is where we are at.
That's why there's a wide range of programs that we want to
ensure that more young people are better ready
to take those opportunities. And let me give you an example of
another initiative that we have started,
that both actually helps the employer and
also the job seeker. So Chamber Works was launched in Auckland a couple
of months ago.
For many businesses, recruitment is the biggest challenge they face.
So for that business that was advertising for a cleaner to get
1,200 applicants would've just been mind-blowing.
That would've been incredibly difficult for them to deal with, as
well as for the 1,200 people that were vying for the job.
So Chamber Works basically means that the employer
will list their vacancy,
on the Chamber Works website, and MSD will
provide
specific screened and suitable
candidates for that vacancy. So in terms of that, instead
of that business getting 1,200 for one job,
they might get 10.
And it also means for the 10 people that put forward,
they know they have a reasonable shot at that job because they
are being put forward for a role that is suitable, matches their
skills and qualifications, matches that experience,
and is more likely to have a successful outcome.
So that's another example. Chamber Works is
nationwide.
26 chambers of commerce
are signed up. So again,
I'm not saying it's not challenging out there, but we are
putting many new initiatives in place to make that process
easier. And again, that's why we've seen a
7% increase in the number of people leaving the benefit for
work, in the period to March 31, which
is incredibly encouraging.
New question, Ricardo.
Thank you very much. I've just got a series of short questions on
automated decision-making, and hopefully we'll get brief answers as well.
What is the accuracy rate for the existing and previous
uses of automated decision-making?
And do you collect those? What has been the response?
Well, as I said, there is an ADM standard that's
reviewed-
What's the accuracy rate?
Every three years.
What's the accuracy rate? I just want to know, do you track how accurate those
decisions are? I just saw a head here saying no.
This was-
Yeah
... responding to the letter.
So you have that information.
How accurate is ADM?
So ADM
in itself is not measured. Right? What we have is eight
accuracy measures across our income support products, as you well know,
across students, working age, seniors.
And those are
KPIs that we report on through our annual report, and we have
eight accuracy measures and six timeliness measures.
That's how we measure the effectiveness of our decision-making
in relation to the accuracy of what we do in the income support system.
That is the way that is measured. ADM in of itself is
not an accuracy measure. Does that make sense?
Well, how do you-
So the-
Yep
... well, the impact of it is what people get and whether they're entitled to it.
And that is measured through the KPI.
But how do you track if ADM has been making
decisions in a way that it is accurate?
And I raise this because in previous sessions, we've had reports around the
accuracy rate of MSD when it comes to people's benefit entitlements, right?
Yeah.
How accurate is ADM at actually making the right decisions
based on people's legal entitlements?
And how often is ADM making errors, if at all?
Yeah. So, I do want to clarify, we do have
accuracy measures, eight of them, that cover the income support payment, which
is exactly to determine date, rate, person
entitlement. Yeah. So that is an external
measure that is reported through our annual report.
And previously you said in your introductory remarks that
decisions where discretion is involved
wasn't going to be used by ADM. Can you confirm that ADM
has not been used or is not going to be used for anything where
discretion could have been used?
So, I was clear when we introduced and passed the legislation.
It was based on business rules. Business rules are a
black and white. That's decision, it's not discretion.
And so I think it is really important to be clear about the difference.
Mel, do you want to give some specific examples that might make it clear?
I may just clarify though, because you have used it for hardship assistance and
previously for temporary additional support.
There is discretion involved in how much you give people for those.
So ADM is being used for things that require a level of
discretion by staff. The staff are making those decisions.
Yeah. So I think
probably just for the committee's information, it's probably
quite important to explain a bit about
ADM's history in MSD and how we've been using it.
So,
just to be really clear, the minister's already said our use of automated
decision-making is not using generative AI.
I just think that-
That's not my question. Yeah.
I just think it would be helpful if I explained some of the-
Sorry. We've got no time. So if you would like to answer-
Ricardo. Excuse me. I would like to hear the answer.
Sorry.
I would like to hear the answer.
Go on a tangent.
So
we've always been able to lawfully use ADM, and that's why
we, as we've over time, looked at ways that we can ensure that
we're not introducing bias or discrimination, and that's why we developed our
ADM standard, which we're probably one of the first
agencies to introduce an ADM standard, and that is to
ensure accuracy of decision-making, removal of bias where we can,
remove discrimination. So
over time, we have been looking at what we've been using ADM for and
refining our processes, and part of that is to assess
suitability of how we use ADM. So, as the
minister has said, rules-based decision-making is really amenable and
suitable for ADM use, and some
processes that we have had ADM in actually
we are saying are less suitable, and that's come through in a number
of pieces of legislation in the last couple of years.
And so a good example of that is temporary additional support.
We are strengthening staff involvement in that process.
For many of you, you'll know that our assistance can be
granted through a number of different ways.
So you can apply for assistance in person in one of our sites,
you can apply through the contact center, and you can also apply for
some assistance through our website, MyMSD.
And all of those processes involve humans at some level, as well as
some elements of automated decision-making.
And that is all about capturing people's individual circumstances and
ensuring we can enable assessment of what they're entitled to.
And if the exceptions apply, or certain limits apply in
those processes, it will be pushed out to a human to
look at those circumstances further.
Yeah, that's probably a good summary.
Can I ask a supplementary?
Just on this, so this is rule-based decision-making, which has been in place
for a long time.
What has been the accuracy on the three or four different programs that humans are
trying to make these rule-based decision-making, if I'm correct,
over the historic sort of platforms.
What has been the accuracy rate?
Well, I guess, going back to what Debbie said in terms of the
accuracy measures across the board, you'd have to go back
through the annual reports over time and then say
when did we introduce, or when did the previous government introduce,
the child support payments,
and draw a connection about whether or not
the use of ADM improved or
reduced
The accuracy and timeliness-
Can you tell us?
... measures.
Well, this is, to be fair, this is an estimates
hearing, which is forward-looking.
If members have questions about that, we can provide
data from the previous annual report,
and we can look back in terms of when the wage subsidy was done.
Look, I think, one of the challenges with the wage subsidy, and I
would feel very cautious about making
assumptions around accuracy and timeliness around when
the wage subsidy was in place, because it was a high trust model, and it was very
deliberately pushed out as fast as possible.
And so in that instance, timeliness was the driver,
accuracy wasn't.
And if people got it that they weren't entitled to,
there was a process afterwards. So, yep, happy
to provide
data from previous annual reports on accuracy and
timeliness,
and points of time for when ADM was
significantly used more, i.e. the wage
subsidy and child support pass on.
But I would just add that caution that it
might not be an accurate
way of determining. But look at it this way,
with the modernization legislation that we passed
in the budget session,
the intent of it is to make
sure that MSD frontline staff
is spent talking to clients and dealing with clients,
having conversations with clients that make a difference to their lives and their
futures, not doing back office
data entry, simple rules-based decisions that
can be automated. So that's the intent of it, and I think it's
really important that we
keep the focus on what the intent is.
Supplementary, Marama David.
Thank you.
Morena. Minister,
in the
line, I guess, between ADM and
the human thing,
are clients or individuals aware that
there is a piece of a process that the ADM
process is engaged, and then there's this other process where
somebody's going to sit across from me and go, "Hey," and then that's actually
made aware, and the
full cognizance of it is understood by the person sitting?
Yeah. Let me just
say first and foremost, most businesses you deal with
will have a level of automated decision making, whether it's your insurance
company, whether it's your bank.
So this is not new, and actually, we should be really
worried if government agencies were not doing more of this to
improve their efficiency, right?
And in my view, to improve their customer
service, to improve the interactions they have with people.
So, I don't think it's something we should be fearful of.
It is normal. It is well understood.
It is well deployed in the private sector.
And in many instances, the public sector are catching up.
But Debbie, do you want to add anything to that?
Well, just probably two things.
On our website, we already have a list of things where we use ADM.
The bill will increase transparency for clients when we
do make decisions that are ADM related decisions and tell them that.
But if you want to use one or two examples.
So we use ADM at the moment when we have a person
applies for a student loan or allowance, and it is
automatically checked to see whether they're on a benefit or not.
If you want to look at the accuracy rate in relation to student loan and
allowances, it's 100%.
Yep. So that is a process that we use. Now, that is a sensible thing to do.
Why would we not, and why would people not expect us to check
whether somebody is on a benefit when they apply for a student loan and allowance
for the same ministry? That seems a
no-brainer. If you think of another use of ADM, we have a net service,
and it allows us to proactively
work and
push, refer young people who are in need
to services where they may get support.
So there are a wide variety of uses of ADM.
Some of them are about making sure people get services and support.
Simple things such as the student loan allowance benefit interface, because
it's in the one organization. Yeah.
It's just one is called a SAL system and the other is called a SWF system.
Supplementary, Maureen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just double-checking
the information that is being considered by ADM.
I'm just relating it to insurance I just bought recently.
Go through a series of checkboxes.
At the end, I get a premium, and I get a cover and policy.
Yeah.
So it's reliant on the information I put in.
So is that the same with the clients that are
inputting information,
being accurate or even truthful about the information that goes in?
And then what consequences are there?
How does MSD follow up to ensure the accuracy of
that information? What are the consequences for putting in false information?
Fab's going to answer that.
I think I'll try and deal with Maureen with your one, and it'll go back to
Ricardo's question as well. I think
Mel was talking about the checks and balances come in.
You apply, you have to be eligible, and there's some certain things for food that
you will have to
answer And you can only get up to $150 through our MyMSD
system. So you have to be eligible, haven't had a claim in the last seven
days. You have to tick all these boxes.
Is there any other places you've looked in terms of trying to
get support? So you have to work through a range of things to tick these boxes.
Then it goes into the next box in terms of how much you're after, what is it
for, these things, have you tried to source those?
And once you get to that, if you've got exceptions, you get pushed out, as Mel
said, to get a person. Right? And then, so you'll get that either in
terms of it might need to be a phone call in through our contact center, or it
might need to be an appointment into our service center.
What happens is, if everything's right, to answer your question, Maureen, is if
they've answered everything
is right, then that should get pushed through to a yes.
It's the nos that get pushed through out.
So if these are declined, that'll get pushed out.
In relation to accuracy, 26 weeks is probably our best piece.
So when we brought in 26 week react last year, what we did is
we actually looked at 1,000
of the applications through the ADM process, and
99.9 of them were accurate.
And it's all based on what they put in.
So we had an assurance process that said, actually we're going to look at 1,000 of
these. We looked at 1,000 of them, and so our people went through that
1,000. That's where they got to the, as long as everything was answered
appropriately, it was making the right answer for what was intended.
For someone that's actually been in case management, for instance, say
your 26 weeks coming up, we're meeting with you, you still have to
reply. So if you've met within the
period, so before your application is up, you can
apply and it's easier for you, and it goes through straight now.
For our place, it's a really easy, low
risk
application. Good for the client.
There's no money per se, but it's making it easy to get their
26-week reapplication where it should be in place.
For others, they may not fit into that.
They'll get kicked out and have to have an appointment. Right?
So there's a mix in terms of how you use this and get assurance,
and we don't feel scared about automated processes which make it easier, and
then bringing the human back in for making judgment decisions on discretion
type things.
Can I just-
Thank you. Last one from Ricardo
... sorry, can I just add to that answer?
Just while you talk, yeah.
So just in terms of the example Viv gave around
26 week react, the eight people who didn't come to the right answer, they were
consistently granted the benefit,
when it should have accepted them out.
So that actually error worked in the favor of the client.
Client.
And it was a small IT problem, which has been fixed.
Yeah. We had an IT issue.
Sorry, I couldn't quite hear you there.
So,
of the 1,000 that we looked at, the eight people where the
judgment the system made wasn't right, they were granted a benefit,
when it should have been accepted and asked for a human to deal with it.
So they weren't denied a benefit because of the error, and it was a small IT
error, which was then fixed.
Right.
Yeah, it wasn't an ADM issue, it was an IT issue.
Got you. Thank you.
Yeah.
Last one, Ricardo.
Two really quick ones on ADM.
Mindful people may want to move on.
There's some savings that are being produced through the use of automated decision
making in the hardship assistance space.
Previously, Minister, you mentioned that these were mostly coming from
overpayments. What proportion of the savings are actually coming from overpayments
alone, and where is the rest coming from?
I don't have the detail in front of me on that one.
Well, the savings that you're producing through the use of ADM, how are you saving
money? You've explicitly mentioned they were predominantly
through because of overpayments, because you were-
Some of them, yeah
... how much of that is through overpayments? You're saving money.
I want to know what the breakdown is.
I'm not sure we have that breakdown, but we can see if we can get it for you.
Well, and how exactly, how are you saving money through the use of
ADM? Where is that money coming from?
Well, it's happened over a couple of years.
You've said overpayments.
So amend, re-review, the reapplication that we did in
budget '25.
So this is the next step,
with the modernization legislation that we passed.
So, basically what we are doing, as Viv just talked
about, is making sure that where people
reapply, they get the grant. For those that don't, they
shouldn't be granted it.
So if somebody isn't eligible, they shouldn't be getting the
benefit.
As Debbie said, we can look at what more detail we can
provide on that. But it is really important that we
ensure,
through the use of technology, that we have a more efficient and effective,
and accurate system.
Where people aren't entitled to benefits, they shouldn't be getting it.
And in some instances, people
are eligible for more support that haven't been getting it.
Just lastly,
Minister Scott, when introducing the modernization bill,
talked about how, and I quote, "There is no explicit general authority to use
it across the system."
Can I just confirm that outside of the four limited uses that you've
been using it prior to the modernization bill,
that you actually had the general authority to use it for those issues
outside of it? And if so, where did that authority come from legislatively?
Yeah. So Mel talked about the background to ADM.
We absolutely have had-
But where in legislation or where did you have those powers for
using it outside of those four discrete things?
So I think, as I tried to explain earlier, automated decision making,
as long as you're appropriately applying it and using it for suitable uses, is
generally able to be done. You don't need a specific legislative provision for it.
But the purpose of putting this through the modernization bill was to ensure
that we were increasing transparency and, um
Um, the ability for people to understand how we were using it and
embedding some of those safeguards into the legislation,
and to ensure that people know what we're using it for, that we publish it, and
it introduced that general authorizing provision as well.
Um, and there is-
And increasingly-
Sorry. Sorry.
And increasingly, we will use it more.
If you think of-
In cases such as?
Well, if you think about
one of the budget initiatives, which is
income matching through Inland Revenue, which will be introduced in
2028. If you think about that, we've been before this committee
a number of times where you've been concerned about debt levels and
overpayments that we put on clients.
We have heard many times then clients artificially hold
down their hours because they're worried about how it tips over in
terms of the money that they get. We have heard many clients who
have felt frustrated because their income has fluctuated over
time. They've been late in declaring it. We've set up an overpayment.
They don't know what their income is on an ongoing basis.
We will use ADM to make sure that to,
and I am making this system up a bit because we haven't built it yet, but
PAYE data will come straight from Inland Revenue into
our system, and you can imagine you would get a text or something from MSD to
say,
"We have received information from Inland Revenue that says your income for this
period was X, confirm yes," and it will go and be
processed straight into your benefit system.
And therefore, we take all of that away, all of that uncertainty, all of
that worry. People declare the wrong amount, they get an overpayment.
They declare the net amount instead of the gross amount.
They've got two part-time jobs, all of those kind of things.
It will save setting up hundreds of millions of dollars worth of debt.
It will mean that clients will be better off in terms of knowing certainty
about what they will get in their
payment every year. That is absolutely where ADM, we will be using it
much more.
Last
question on this one.
Yeah, thank you. Just wanting to drill down a bit more into the
anticipated savings from the use of this.
I think in the budget, it talks about the new policy initiative,
the additional savings and hardship assistance due to ADM remediation
totaling 54.5 million over the
next four years. Is there more detail that you can give us
about what that breakdown looks like in terms of hardship assistance?
Yeah, we can provide that information because that's just the number we've-- Sorry,
I don't have it. We can look to see what other detail we can get you.
Great.
Okay.
Thank you.
Can I just add?
Yeah, sure.
I think the thing is we cost each part of these.
So there are a number of changes that each get costed separately, and we
can provide more information about that.
Okay.
Thank you.
New question, Diana.
Thank you. Minister, I'm just interested in moving now to the work of
the Dame Karen Potasi Work Program in discussing a
bit, and I understand you
said that the government had accepted all 14 of the
recommendations. So just interested in some of the detail around that and
around the $90.3 million operating funding,
what that will bring and how that will be implemented.
Yep, thank you. And look, this is really important work.
I think anyone who remembers the circumstances,
and the child that triggered the Dame
Karen Potasi review will realize how important it is.
But it wasn't just that one child. There are far too many examples.
Yes.
So the recommendations that we've already done, recommendation 10, which is
monitoring ECE services' implementation of child protection policies.
You may remember in that instance, one of the ECEs lost their
license as a result of their actions.
The recommendation 11 is defining in legislation which
agencies make up the government's
children's system.
And then 14 was requiring the independent children's monitor to review
progress on the recommendations after one year as
part of the wider system review. In terms of the 90 million,
it's across health, education and Oranga Tamariki.
I talked previously about the 20,000 core children's
workers that will be trained.
Mm-hmm.
A few people have said, "Oh, why do we
need to do more training?" Well, it is consistent training.
It will be the same training rolled out no matter who you work for across
the public service,
which is really important. And that consistency is a critical part
of it. They've been doing, the first 500 people have
been trained already.
So really working out of the training modules any
improvements that needed to be made before they roll it out to the wider
200,000.
20,000, sorry.
One of the others that I visited recently was the
interagency hub.
So you might remember, in the instance that was the
subject
of the review, and I'm deliberately not using the name
to respect the family.
So it is a bit of a no-brainer when there is a sole parent who
is taken into custody,
their children are at risk. And so this
interagency hub has been set up
to be able to more quickly share information to find
out where those children are.
Does the caregiver who's looking after them require support and
assistance? What else is necessary to wrap around that family,
the mother,
sole parent generally is often is a mother, and those children to
ensure that there is not ongoing harm.
And I met with the team in the hub recently,
and while you'd like to think that information was
easily accessible, it isn't always.
And so to be able to track down-
Where those children are-
Mm
... hasn't been straightforward.
And so really it's looking at a different way of working
to prevent harm, which is very much an
important part of it.
Big chunk of the funding, 64.7 million, goes to Oranga
Tamariki to respond to
what we are expecting
will be an increase in reports of concern.
So
where we're heading is mandatory training.
We're focusing on the 20,000 core children's workers first.
Mandatory training, the
concern that people raise is that it then means greater
identifications of concern. So we have resourced
with nearly $65 million into Oranga Tamariki extra
capacity to deal with that. Look, it would be great
if we don't see more reports of concern,
but we know from other countries who have done this,
that that is a likely result in the short term.
So that's a bit of an update in terms of where we're at.
Thank you.
Supplementary, Will Jean.
Supplementary.
Thank you, Minister. We already know that Oranga Tamariki is
failing to respond to the increased reports of
concern that are already taking place as a
result to cuts in funding to community providers and
increased reporting. So-
That's an assumption, Will Jean. You can't make that assumption.
Well, that was in the Independent Children's Monitor report, actually.
OT.
So my ques-
You don't seem to know that
... my question and concern is which agency will be
accountable for managing the delivery and reporting
against this budget that is-
So I'm the minister responsible.
So you're going to be-
I'm the minister responsible-
Yeah
... for the response.
So the 14 recommendations that we have accepted,
I am leading the Children Youth Ministers group who are
responsible for delivering on the recommendations.
So you're the-
As I've said-
Yeah
... we have delivered three currently,
and we have another 11 to go.
I guess the thing here-
So you're the minister, but which agency?
Yeah.
So let me answer, because I think there's a lot of interest in
this.
Many
areas where we collectively have failed in the past
is because we have operated as government agencies in silos,
and it was no more stark than
being at the hub. Right? So you can imagine sitting around the
table, couple of people from OT, Justice, Corrections,
Police, Health, Education, MSD.
What we don't want to happen
is for people to sit there and say, "Not my problem, yours."
It is everybody's problem. The safety of those children is
everybody's problem.
And by putting something in place like that
hub,
which enables-- They're already able to share information, right?
And the privacy commissioner has come out and reinforced they can share
information.
And so while I accept you want to
point the finger at an individual agency,
as a government, we are saying it is all of our responsibilities,
and sometimes one part of the system needs
support from another, i.e., in health.
We need Health New Zealand to participate in the Child Protection Protocol.
That's why we've funded it in this Dame Karen Potasi
report, so they can assist the work that OT
is doing and that police are doing, and we do not want to
continue to have a situation where we have this finger-pointing.
That does not save any child from harm, and it has to stop.
We have to get to a place where collectively we are
responsible, and we don't do this thing that it's OT's fault or it's
that minister's fault, or it's such and such official's fault.
That doesn't help anything. It does not protect any child
from harm. So,
this is a significant shift, and we have to continue it,
because
we have a terrible track record in this country.
So not pointing the finger, just stating the facts as they have
been presented to us. There are increased reports of concern.
They can't already meet their obligations there.
You are expecting there's going to be even more reports of concern as a result of
this budget initiative.
And $65 million funded.
And so my question was which agency is going to
be leading the reporting and monitoring?
You've said it as the minister you're responsible, but I'm asking which
agency.
Well, it'll depend on what the piece of work is.
So the Oranga Tamariki, if they are receiving, which they are,
nearly $65 million to increase their capacity, they will be
responsible for that.
So each one will individually be responsible for their
individual parts of the vote?
Yes. But I want to
state again,
the protection of children in New Zealand is a responsibility on all of
us. And as a government, it is a responsibility for
all of the ministers responsible in the children's system.
The children's system is not just Oranga Tamariki.
It is MSD, it is Police, it is Education, it is
Health. And I expect, as a minister, every single one of
those public sector agencies to do their job and to do it
collectively. And that is why we have accepted the
14 recommendations.
Supplementary, Marama Davidson.
Thank you. Minister,
just listening to that response, I was-
I reflected back on, I don't know whether you remember HESOG.
It used to be a health education social services offices
of government back in your day, given your laughing.
And it's yeah, and-
Must be a long time ago.
Long time ago. Long time ago.
In that though, the similar principles
of what you're describing were what was required then.
And for some reason, it didn't land.
And
obviously, mokopuna are all of our
responsibility, including everyone in the room.
So I
want to understand whether is there this renewed
sense that this idea will work this time?
Yeah. Look, it's hard. It is really hard, because the nature
of agencies is to operate in their lane and in their
silo.
Yeah.
Right? So if you think about what I said before
about the same training being rolled out to
20,000 core children's workers, irrespective of which
agency they work for, right? And I've had some that have said, "Oh, well,
we've already done the XYZ agency training.
Why do we have to do it again?" I'm like, "You're not.
You are doing that consistent,
uniform training that will be rolled out across the public service, because
we're not doing what we used to do." So there will
be lots of different ways for
us to embed
a different way of working.
Will it be perfect? Absolutely not.
But we must and we can make progress.
And that's why I think that the cross ministers
group,
for any chief executive who's sat in those meetings,
they will be under no illusion what I expect and what our government expects
of them in terms of working together.
Then they have chief
executive level work to ensure that's happening.
Also
there is a
senior public servant who was then working across
agencies.
So yes, might be funded by one government agency, but is working
across the agencies to do this work.
And we've got to continue to find ways and
embed ways
of doing it differently.
Question, Jenny.
Thank you very much, Chair.
Minister, you're on the record saying that it's not the responsibility
for your government to create job opportunities, but instead to
create economic conditions for jobs.
When we look at the forecast under the 2023 HYFU and compare that
to the 2026 budget forecast, we see that
GDP per capita has been downgraded
from 1.5% to 0.6%.
GDP growth in general for the economy has gone from
2.8% down to 1.2%, while in the
meantime, inflation has increased from 3.2 to
4.0. And lastly, unemployment forecast at
23 to be 4.8% has now been revised to
5.5% under your government. So could you please
explain to the committee why your government has failed on its
promise to be able to deliver the economic conditions where
jobs are available for hardworking New Zealanders?
Absolutely. So, I think people, New Zealanders, will
understand the economic conditions that we inherited.
And look, quite bluntly, if you think about the challenges that have
arisen since,
with Trump's tariffs, with weather events, and with the war in the Middle
East,
all three things that we cannot control.
The fact that inflation is at 3.1 instead of
7.2%,
is a significant benefit. And just
imagine for a moment, if inflation was still running at
7.2%, what that would be doing to fuel prices and household
budgets right now.
That's right.
So I accept the economic conditions
are challenging. But that doesn't prevent us doing the things
that we know make a difference.
And given the member is very interested in forecasts, I talked
before about the job seeker numbers peaking,
hopefully, in December last year, despite
us then encountering the Middle East conflict.
And also, if we look at the unemployment rate, it's
at 5.3%, not the forecast 5.5.
If you look at the average, and it feels high for us, and I know it's
uncomfortable, but if you look at the last 30 years, the
average unemployment rate over the 30 years on the long run
is 5.1,
right? So it is important that we understand that as a context,
but I accept that it is higher than any of us would like.
So we will continue with our plan.
We will continue the work, as I said, that MSD is doing, working
with businesses in a different way than they have in the past,
building really important, strong, long-term relationships with
employers. Not just dealing with they've got a vacancy today, but what
do their labor market needs look like over the next three, six,
12 months?
Regional commissioners are engaging in a different way in the
regions to understand what the opportunities are.
And that's where, in terms of
dealing with the job seeker numbers, we're seeing strong exits
into work.
And the treasury forecasts we have seen for
this budget, budget '26
Forecasting an additional 220,000
jobs coming into the economy.
Has MSD done any forecasts to determine how many people will
move on to job seeker support as a result of the roughly
9,000 public sector job cuts?
Well, as I said,
treasury forecasts were for 220,000 new
jobs to be created out of Budget '26.
The member refers to savings that we are looking at across the
public service, including MSD, 2% in
the first year.
Look, you also hopefully will have read in the documents that
the investment into sole parents is an investment in
additional case managers, because we know that
is the single biggest intervention we can make.
We are investing in that because we know it gets results.
And
I'm proud of the record, I'm proud of the work that we are doing,
and that we are investing in employment initiatives, in employment
programs that we know get results.
Right. So taking on board that you haven't created the economic conditions
for jobs and you've laid off more people-
Well, no, I refute that. I totally refute that.
Does Budget-
So do not-
Do not put words in my mouth
Wait, wait. You need to brief her on the fresh and best budget.
No, carry on
Does Budget 2026 do anything to support women
age 20 to 24 who continue to have the highest NEAT
rate, which rose from 1.9% to
20.3 in March? What are you doing in that space?
Yeah, so Minister Simmons spoke a lot about that earlier.
And as I said, there is a wide range of programs that are
available
to support young people.
Are they new?
Well, they don't have to be new. They have to be effective.
Okay.
I'm more interested-
It's 20.3%
... in effective, as I said before.
It's not effective.
Well, do you want me to answer the question or not?
Go ahead.
I'll repeat what I said earlier. 65% of the
employment programs that are funded,
93% are effective. Case management is
one of the most effective. I'm surprised that you didn't realize that.
70,000 are now in case management.
We've introduced phone-based case management, so 10,000 in
phone-based case management because, as I said, we know that is the
most significant impact, and that's why we
continue to fund and actually have increased the number
participating in that.
That's it.
Supplementary, Laura.
Thank you, Ms. Flett. So just following on from some of the case
management comments. You talked about NEATs
having a community-based
wraparound. Have you considered that approach
for other job seekers, those that are work-ready,
contracting that out to community to be able to deliver it?
It's probably really expensive, so it's more likely you're going to say that, but
is it something that you've considered or are looking at?
And we do a lot of it. We do a lot of it.
Mm-hmm.
And I won't have this percentage on the top of my head, but in terms of regional
contracts-
Mm-hmm
... that's where a regional commissioner is able to look at,
and when we're talking about young people, what are the needs of the young
people that they have on their books, but equally, what
are the opportunities in the regional economy?
Mm-hmm.
And so if, again, because that TV program was so
recent in South Auckland,
at Ara, which is on Auckland Airport's site,
they know that they will need a large workforce in the
trades and in construction, which is why
they used that training opportunity to give people skills in
construction.
We also know with a growing tourism and hospitality
number,
and increasing numbers of visitors, we will continue to need
more people working in tourism and hospitality, particularly at the
airport site.
Mm-hmm.
That's why Ara are delivering training in South
Auckland for South Auckland young people for South Auckland
jobs.
And so that very localized solution happens a
lot.
And the other thing that I would add to that is, particularly
for young people, we will continue to invest in
more community job coaching, which is that
wraparound support. And that is where
the job coach works not just with the young person, but with
the employer as well. Because often,
there will be things that come up that a young person can't navigate-
Mm-hmm
... with their employer. And so having that job coach as
the bridge
enables a lot more troubleshooting,
and ensures that that young person can stay connected to
employment.
New question, Jamie.
Minister, you've got a big project that's going to be started, the
Services for Future program.
And I just note, like the industry of modern tech and business processes,
and over the five years, it's over 957
million. Big numbers. 195 million starting
in '26, '27 year. My question's around, we
know technology projects are often risky, and probably even some of the
news that hit yesterday were around immigration.
But we've had some really successful projects as well for inland revenue.
So my questions
for you is,
what are the key milestones and your oversight as minister?
And, do you still stand by that almost $2 billion
worth of savings could be seen out of this project?
Great.
So the
Services for the Future is a program of work that, as you
said,
spans a long period of time.
And I think with these really large
IT infrastructure and services programmes, they also change.
They
go over different periods of government.
And so we have picked this up. It is
well down the track.
There's a couple of things that are really important in terms of the governance and
oversight. One of them is the gateway reviews,
and we've had seven of those so far.
So as you'd imagine, a programme of this size has a significant amount
of oversight.
One of the other things that's in place is
an independent person who provides advice to me directly as the
minister. So I'm able to ask
particular questions and be satisfied or not in terms
of how that's occurring. Then in terms of
people on the team who are at that sort of governance level, we do
have one that's come from Inland Revenue, because we know that was
a really successful long-term complex programme of work.
And so that
is an important part of it.
In terms of milestones coming up, digital employment is
coming up shortly.
It's fair to say it's going to be delivered later,
only by a couple of months, than what we had envisaged.
One of the things when you're dealing with a programme of this size is you've got
to get it right, and that's where the oversight system
works.
When there is an issue that might lead to a delay,
that is brought to the surface and brought to my attention as the
minister very early on.
I was getting regular updates in terms of progress,
and then we're able to say, "Right, it's slightly delayed.
This is the new timeline for delivery." And if you think about a 10-year programme
of work, that's totally and absolutely to be expected.
Tracy is the DCE responsible for Services for the
Future. So Tracy, is there anything you'd want to add about the upcoming
milestones?
Well, I'd say it's an exciting time for us at the moment.
We can't underestimate where we're entering into.
We've actually built the new service platform.
It integrates with all our heritage systems. It's secure.
We've done all the identity, and we're only a week out from go live.
And if that doesn't go to plan, we've got plan B, which is the following week.
So
really, digital employment service comes live,
and that really allows our job seekers to access a
digital service. They can enter in information, and behind the scenes, our people
are actually using this new service platform to-- And
we've got some smarts around matching.
So it's really enabling them to actually have a different sort of
engagement with our job seekers. Alongside that, and
parallel to that, you may recall when I was here last time, we were speaking
about
a contract management system to remove the red
tape for our partners. Well, we went live with that in November, and we've
had really good feedback from our partners because that allows them to
digitally engage with us, as well as we have one contract
management system. And we've actually reused our financial
system, which we implemented four years ago.
So we haven't created something new.
We've reused common patterns, and we've made some really
good progress in that. In addition to that,
in parallel, we've built the contact center system, which
is really our voice platform. We are only months away
to have our first lot of users in there.
And this is all working in parallel with our existing
heritage systems. Going forward, we're now
really focused on what does the configuration look like for our new
service model. And then from that new service model, we are
sequencing the activity of work based on the benefits that
we've agreed to the Crown that we will deliver.
So it's significant progress in 12 months.
We're now at a point where we're actually configuring these
systems to deliver the value, and you will see lots of
incremental changes over the next period.
We'll have the next big release on digital employment, where employers
will be able to input vacancies, as well as us
having electronic integrations with their
recruitment systems to assist us.
Yes.
Can I just-
Yeah.
The
work that we are doing, it's not how you would
see transformations done in the past.
There's no big bang. There is what they call drops.
So you introduce digital employment, and then you will keep iterating it and you
will keep iterating it. So the enhancements will continue to be
made. One of the things, when we get further down
the track with digital employment, will be to do some of the things I think,
Eugene, that you were concerned about, is we'll be able to see in the system
people who are struggling to get jobs, and we'll be able to look in the
system and say, "Actually, maybe your CV needs a bit more work.
Actually, you're applying for the wrong jobs maybe.
Maybe we put you with a provider. Maybe it's a driver's license." I know that
sounds very simple, but maybe it's a driver's license that you're missing.
So we'll actually be able to see in the system some of the issues and challenges
job seekers are having to be able to, instead of-- Because at the moment, we would
be relatively blind to that. If you're working with a work broker or if you're
lucky to be in case management more directly, but we only have
17,000 places at the moment for case management and we've got a lot
more job seekers. So there's a real opportunity through this modern
technology to be able to see in the system
challenges people are experiencing, and then be able to
get them with our community partners.
Or
go to an employer and say, "And here's some support or subsidy that we
might be able to match with that job seeker if you're prepared to
help upskill them or something." So it is quite
an exciting time.
These projects do come with risk, but
we're pretty confident in the governance, et cetera, that we've got around them.
So it-
I want to ask a new question.
Yep.
And it's just looking at the social development, it's 24% of the total
budget.
That's $58.36 billion in budget 2026,
'27. And that's significantly bigger than the next one, which is health at
16%, and the next one after that, education at 10%.
So it's a big budget
looking after.
If you look at the benefits or related expenses
in 2026, '27, it's $42.9 billion, so that's up from
40.6 in the '25, '26 year.
62% of that is superannuation.
And then you look, money keeps on increasing each year in the forecast period.
So '27, '28, it's increased to 63%,
'28, '29, increased to 65%. So it's rationing up.
So the amount of total money for benefits, related expenses is rationing up and the
amount of, or the percentage of that is superannuation is rationing up.
What thinking is being done about addressing that
infrastructural challenge that we have as a country?
Yeah. So, I think the first thing to say is,
when people look at the total vote,
it's often quite shocking to them.
But you're right that the
superannuation super payments are the significant part of it.
So MSD is the operational arm in terms of deploying super
payments, but we don't make policy decisions about it.
So look, I think, when we talk about
the future costs
of vote social development,
it will be challenging as the number of workers decrease
over time, and that's something that Treasury have been talking about for
quite some time.
So I focus very much on ensuring that,
for the welfare system, we are focusing on those who
need it most,
that it is sustainable. So if you think about the review of social housing,
which no doubt you'll be raising with Minister Bishop this afternoon.
The review of social housing is all about how do we ensure
that the system is fair, that it is equitable, that it is
delivering for those who have the greatest needs, and it is
sustainable over time. So those are
considerations that lead to policy decisions
that we make and we have made, and will continue to do
over the next three to five years in the review of social housing.
And if you think about the changes that we've made,
and also the classic Invest to Save with the 93 million into
sole parents. I don't want to see the number of sole parents
continuing to increase, because we know of the impact
long-term welfare recipients have, and also it
directly relates to the number of children and benefit dependent households.
So we look at that long-term forecast trajectory,
not just for this
one year, the four years, but the forecasts beyond, to
make decisions now that will bend the curve
down in terms of future years on benefit.
And it won't be an easy task to... And we may
never be in a position where the vote
in total decreases.
But it will need to get to a point in future where it stabilizes,
because as you say, otherwise the number of workers and
people paying tax
will be significantly less than it is today.
And it becomes much more challenging in terms of affordability for us as a
country.
Ricardo. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Over this term, there's been two savings initiatives that have
seen two different groups of people
have a reduction in their accommodation supplement.
One of them has already kicked in,
and that's the one around people with borders.
Mm-hmm.
At the time, MSD advised you that the projected savings may be
inaccurate because people may need to access support from other parts of the
system. Now that that change is in place, and
you're able to track the savings you're making from it,
how much money have you saved from reducing accommodation supplement,
from people who have borders? And what's the
reduction in the accommodation supplement that those people have seen since
that savings initiative kicked in this year?
Yeah. So,
just to reiterate, and it links back really nicely with the last question
around making sure that the system is fair and
equitable and focused on those who have the highest needs.
So the changes to the accommodation supplement for borders,
was to make it fair. So no matter how many borders you had,
that was taken into consideration.
I'm not sure if it's too early for us to know what the savings are.
Do we have a timeframe?
How many people have been affected so far since it's kicked in then?
Okay. Do we know the timeframe in which we will be able
to report back?
No, but we can provide information about what we know and when we will know more.
Are you aware if any of them have had to access hardship
assistance as a result of these changes?
That sort of evaluation hasn't been done to date.
Since,
I'll get that information later. Just a supplementary-
One last question on that, and I'll come back to you. Go on.
Hi. Thank you. I have had an email from a woman
whose child,
is 18
They are not suitable at the moment
for training because of the difficulties that
they've been going through. She's on a benefit.
She's got a delicate situation there with a teenager,
and one of the changes that's been made in the legislation
is that that child has to go into
some form of training if there's going to be any support for that parent.
Now, she has other children. It's a genuine situation.
I wonder why we would be putting
so much pressure on sole parents, whose job is important, because actually
we need more children.
Why would we do that and overload that
person with that responsibility
when it's just that the child can't get any financial support, and their
only real option is that they
go into some training they're not ready for and rack
up debt?
Well, there's two things. So,
with the 18 and 19 policy that you are referring to,
there is a parental assistance test. One of those is income.
And for the scenario, and obviously I don't have all of the
detail in front of me,
it may well be that that parent's income is low,
and therefore-
Their child's 18-
No. No. No
... the law changes, so automatically they get cut off.
Honest, Helen. Helen.
No, no, that's not accurate.
You mustn't.
That's not right. That's not accurate. It's not right.
So basically,
the policy is that 18 or 19-year-olds will not be eligible
for the job seeker benefit unless
they pass the parental assistance test.
One of those is a parental support gap, similar to
what exists at the moment with the youth service,
and the other is a parental income test.
So we do recognize there will be some families who don't have
the means to support their 18 and 19-year-olds, which is why
the parental assistance test is in place.
Thank you very much, Minister and officials. We will now take a break.
Thank you.